Basic BIDS Principles
==============================

This document will give a short and sweet introduction to the basic naming
system for BIDS-compliant niftis and their JSON sidecars as well as example
folder structures. For a much more comprehensive introduction to the BIDS
structure, see `the BIDS docs
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/01-introduction.html>`_


File Name Structure
------------------------------
File names are made from combinations of key-value pairs strung together. Some
key-value pairs are optional based on the experimental design, but others, such
as subject name and task type for fMRI scans, are not. Key-value pairs are
linked with hyphens while underscores separate each pair. For example, if a
participant with ID TS001 had a resting state scan, the portion of the scan name
telling us such would read ``sub-TS001_task-rest``. 

Since both ``-`` and ``_`` are protected characters in the BIDS naming
system, they cannot be used in participant or scan IDs and should be removed
during BIDS conversion. Conversion tools can take care of that automatically,
but if you choose to manually convert to BIDS, you will need to include this
step in your pipeline.

A summary of all possible key-value pairs that make up a BIDS name as well as
whether they are optional or required can be found in the `entity table
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/04-entity-table.html>`_.


JSON sidecars
-------------------------------

Each nifti file in your study should also have an accompanying JSON file that
contains relevant metadata from the DICOM files that can be lost when converting
to nifti as well as pertinent information about the participant and study. The
accompanying JSON files can be complex and tedious to create manually. If you
choose to create custom JSON sidecars, it is imperative you read about the
associated required metadata fields for each type of scan in your study. Those
descriptions and naming guidelines for MRI data can be found in the `BIDS MRI
naming guide <https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html>`__.

It is highly recommended to use a semi-automatic DICOM to BIDS converter to
generate both the nifti and JSON files. Recommended converters are `dcm2bids
<https://github.com/UNFmontreal/Dcm2Bids>`__ and `heudiconv
<https://github.com/nipy/heudiconv>`__. A general guide to using heudiconv can
be found in this documentation as well.


Example Name Formats
-------------------------------

For the following examples, any key-value pain in [] is optional in the name.
Replace entries in <> with corresponding information for the scan. Some values
in <> must be chosen from a given list from the BIDS site. For example, a T1w
anatomical image must have the <suffix> field specified as T1w, not T1. 

These examples are not exhaustive but include some more common use cases. Links
to more examples as well as a complete list and explanation of key-value pairs
are given in each section. 

Common Keys
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All common keys listed here can be used for multiple image types, but none are
required to be included except in specific cases. However, these can be included
to further describe the scan to other researchers without having to read
metadata from the JSON files.

.. list-table::
    :widths: 15 60 25
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Key
      - Description
      - Example Values
    * - ses
      - Session number the scan belongs to. If the subject 
      - ses-01, ses-02
    * - dir
      - Image phase-encoding direction 
      - dir-AP, dir-LR
    * - run
      - Distinguishes between scans with the same acquisition and direction
      - run-1, run-2
    * - acq
      - Allows the user to distinguish between parameter sets used to acquire
        the same image modality
      - acq-highres, acq-lowres


Anatomical
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Names for general anatomical nifti and json files can be found here. These
include T1w, T2w, MP2RAGE, proton density, and others, but not
diffusion-weighted or functional data. Also included are naming conventions for
binary defacing masks, if defacing was performed for your dataset. Defacing is
not required, and inclusion of the masks is not required even if defacing was performed.

.. code-block::

    anat/
        # Naming structure for general anatomical scans
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_<suffix>.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>]_<suffix>.nii[.gz]

        # Naming structure for binary mask used during potential defacing
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_mod-<label>]_defacemask.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_run-<index>][_mod-<label>]_defacemask.nii[.gz]

A more complete list of anatomical names and key-value pair explanations can be
found `here
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#anatomy-imaging-data>`__.


Functional (Task and Resting)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Currently, the supported contrasts for task and resting imaging data are BOLD
and cerebral blood volume (CBV). 

.. code-block::

    func/
        # BOLD contrast naming scheme
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_bold.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_bold.nii[.gz]
        
        # CBV contrast naming scheme
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_cbv.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_cbv.nii[.gz]
        
        # Single-band reference images collected before multi-band sequences
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_sbref.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_echo-<index>][_part-<label>]_sbref.nii[.gz]
        
        # Naming scheme for description of event timing during tasks scans
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>]_events.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>]_events.tsv
        
        # Naming scheme for physio data collected and stored as tsv
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_physio.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>]_task-<label>[_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>][_rec-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_recording-<label>]_physio.tsv.gz

The task key followed by the task name is always required for BOLD and CBV
scans. For resting-state scans, the appropriate key-value pair is ``task-rest``.
For multiple resting state or multiple of the same task, use the ``run`` and
``dir`` keys to differentiate them. 

Task event file names should match the scan name exactly, except replacing
_bold.nii.gz with _events.tsv. As always, the json file name should match the
events.tsv name.

A more complete list of functional names and key-value pair explanations can be
found `here
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#task-including-resting-state-imaging-data>`__.


Diffusion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Currently, the only supported diffusion imaging types are diffusion-weighted
(dwi), and their corresponding single-band reference (sbref) images, if
multi-band was used to collect the diffusion data.

.. code-block::

    dwi/
        # bvec and bval outputs from converting to nifti
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_dwi.bval
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_dwi.bvec
        
        # Diffusion scan naming scheme
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_dwi.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_dwi.nii[.gz]
        
        # SBRef naming scheme
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_sbref.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_dir-<label>][_run-<index>][_part-<label>]_sbref.nii[.gz]
        
bvec and bval files MUST follow the FSL format.

A more complete list of diffusion names and key-value pair explanations as well
as an explanation of the FSL format for bvec and bval files can be found `here
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#diffusion-imaging-data>`__.


Fieldmap
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Multiple types of phasemaps can be stored using the BIDS data structure. These
include phase-difference maps, two phase maps, direct field maps, and
phase-encoded polar fieldmaps. Which type of fieldmap you acquire for your
dataset will determine the suffix at the end of the file name.

.. code-block::

    fmap/
        # Phase-difference maps
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude1.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude1.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude2.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude2.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phasediff.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phasediff.nii[.gz]

        # Two phase maps 
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude1.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude1.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude2.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude2.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phase1.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phase1.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phase2.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_phase2.nii[.gz]

        # Direct fieldmap 
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_fieldmap.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_fieldmap.nii[.gz]
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_run-<index>]_magnitude.nii[.gz]

        # Multiple phase encoded directions (AP/PA; LR/RL)
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>]_dir-<label>[_run-<index>]_epi.json
        sub-<label>[_ses-<label>][_acq-<label>][_ce-<label>]_dir-<label>[_run-<index>]_epi.nii[.gz]

For multiple phase encoded directions, the dir key-pair must be included in the
name. A more complete list of field map names and key-value pair explanations as
well as an explanation of the FSL format for bvec and bval files can be found
`here
<https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/01-magnetic-resonance-imaging-data.html#fieldmap-data>`__.

.. 
    TODO: Add short section on IntendedFor field here once that section is
    written in the HeuDiConv section.

BIDS Validation
-------------------------

After you convert a dataset to BIDS, you can validate it using a couple of
tools. First, there is an online validator at
`<https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-validator/>`__. Select your BIDS output
dataset folder and it will determine if anything is not BIDS compliant. It does
not upload any data, so it is safe for PHI.

fmriprep, as its first step, also will perform BIDS validation on any subject it
is performed on. This can be disabled as a setting if you've already used the
online tool. It's a good idea to always validate the dataset after conversion
just in case something needs to be fixed.